Bnlearn tutorial (#7)
robertness/causalML: tutorials/Intro_to_causal_reasoning_with_Dags_bnlearn.Rmd

---

> title: "Introducing bnlearn package in R"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Introduction to Causal Reasoning on DAGS"
subtitle: "A tutorials using R and the bnlearn package"
```

author: "Sara Taheri"

> date: "5/2/2019"

Reviewer: Remove date

header-includes:
   - \usepackage{amsmath}
   - \usepackage{soul}
output: 
  html_document:
    self_contained: true
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo=TRUE, warning=FALSE, message=FALSE)
library(bnlearn)
library(Rgraphviz)
```

> # Overview of the survey data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Overview of a Transportation Survey Data Set
```

> ## Survey data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data description
```

> Survey data is a data set that contains information about usage of different transportation systems with a focus on cars and trains for different social groups. It includes these factors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data set contains information about usage of different transportation systems with a focus on cars and trains for different social groups. It includes the follow discrete variables:
```

> - **Age (A):** It is recorded as *young* (**young**) for individuals below 30 years, *adult* (**adult**) for individuals between 30 and 60 years old, and *old* (**old**) for people older than 60.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Age (A):** Takes 3 values: *young* (**young**) for individuals below 30 years, *adult* (**adult**) for individuals between 30 and 60 years old, and *old* (**old**) for people older than 60.
```

- **Sex (S):** The biological sex of individual, recorded as *male* (**M**) or *female* (**F**).

- **Education (E):** The highest level of education or training completed by the individual, recorded either *high school* (**high**) or *university degree* (**uni**).

- **Occupation (O):** It is recorded as an *employee* (**emp**) or a *self employed* (**self**) worker.

- **Residence (R):** The size of the city the individual lives in, recorded as *small* (**small**) or *big* (**big**).

- **Travel (T):** The means of transport favoured by the individual, recorded as *car* (**car**), *train* (**train**) or *other* (**other**)

Travel is the *target* of the survey, the quantity of interest whose behaviour is under investigation.

> ```{r, fig.width=3, fig.height=3, fig.align='center'}

Reviewer: give this code block a name, so the image is saved with a name.

# empty graph
dag <- empty.graph(nodes = c("A","S","E","O","R","T"))
arc.set <- matrix(c("A", "E",
                    "S", "E",
                    "E", "O",
                    "E", "R",
                    "O", "T",
                    "R", "T"),
                  byrow = TRUE, ncol = 2,
                  dimnames = list(NULL, c("from", "to")))
arcs(dag) <- arc.set
nodes(dag)
arcs(dag)
graphviz.plot(dag)
```

> # Conditional independence in Bayesian networks

Reviewer: Capitalize all words in H1 headers

> Using a DAG structure we can investigate whether a variable is conditionally independent from another variable given a set of variables from the DAG. If the variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DAG is a graphical language for reasoning about conditional independence in the joint probability distribution of the variables in a data generating process.
```

Reviewer: After this, add the code examples for V-structure.

Then add Markov blanket.

> **Markov blanket**: The Markov blanket of a node is comprised of its parents, children and children's other parents.  In other words, it is comprised of its parents, children, and any other members of V-structures to which it belongs.

Then include an example of the `mb` code.

For the `mb` we need a plot.  You can use `graphviz` to highlight an MB in your example, or use a free image from the web like this one. ![mb](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ea/MarkovBlanket.png)

> depend directly on each other, there will be a single arc connecting the nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This comment on direct dependence is not accurate.  Dependence is a probabilistic concept.  Nodes are not "directly" or "indirectly" dependent.

> corresponding to those two variables. If the dependence is indirect, there will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> be two or more arcs passing through the nodes that mediate the association.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: Create a new section here:

# Conditional Independence and the Global Markov Property

We use the graphical concepts in the previous section to reason about the data generating process we want to model.  Specifically, the graphical concepts represent assumptions of **conditional independence** in the joint distribution over all the variables in the process.

Reviewer: After this, go in order of the previous section

1.  V-structures and how you can have parents that are independent, but become dependent when you condition on the child.  Use the "sprinkler example": rain -> sidewalk wetness <- sprinkler.  rain and sprinkler are independent, but they become conditionally dependent when you observe the sidewalk is wet. The probability the sprinkler is on is the unaffected by finding out it is not raining.  However, given the sidewalk is wet, finding out it is not raining tells you the sprinkler must be on.
2. Markov blanket:  Explain that the Markov blanket makes a node conditionally independent of all the other nodes in the system.  That means that if you predict that node, given the nodes in the Markov blanket, adding any other predictors to your model is overfitting, because the Markov blanket contains all the information available about the node.
3.  D-separation:  Introduce the global Markov property.  Use Elements of Causal Inference page 101 as a guide. Here is a start
> We have a data generating process with a joint distribution $P_X$.  We come up with a DAG $G$.  The global Markov property is a property of G.  It means that all of the d-separations in $G$, correspond to conditional independence assumptions in $P_X$.  When we build a causal model that has an underlying causal DAG, we generally assumes the DAG meets the global Markov property.

Then use your $$ { \!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{G} \textbf{Y } $$ notation like on page 101 in Scholkopf.

Reviewer: After this part, add the following about the local Markov property and the Markov factorization property.

> ## Other aspects of the Markov property of DAGs
> 
> In addition to the global Markov property, we have the local Markov property.  A DAG satisfies the local Markov property with respect to a distribution if each node in the graph is conditionally independent of its non-descendants given its parents.  

Demonstrate the local Markov property with a code example.  Use `dsep` and to show a simple case of a node being d-separated from its grandparent given its parent.  Then generate data from the graph and use `ci.test` to show the same result.

> If a DAG has the Markov factorization property with respect to a distribution, then the distribution factorizes according to the ordering of the DAG.

1. Show the factorization of the Survey Model.
2. Show that you can extract this factorization in bnlearn using `modelstring()`

Author: I combined this section with the previous section because I think it makes more sense. Instead of generating data, I used the survey data from the data folder.

> If $\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ are separated by $\textbf{Z}$, we say that $\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ are conditionally independent given $\textbf{Z}$ and denote it with,

Reviewer: Replace this with a definition of the global Markov property.  Use notation from Scholkopf and Janzing

> We have a data generating process with a joint distribution $P_X$.  We come up with a DAG $G$.  The global Markov property is a property of G.  It means that all of the d-separations in $G$, correspond to conditional independence assumptions in $P_X$.

Then use your $$ { \!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{G} \textbf{Y } $$ notation like on page 101 in Scholkopf.

> If $\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ are separated by $\textbf{Z}$, we say that $\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ are conditionally independent given $\textbf{Z}$ and denote it with,

Reviewer: The reset of this section can be removed in favor of the changes above.

Similarly, G is an independency map (or **I-map**) of M if

$$\textbf{X } {\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{P} \textbf{ Y } | \textbf{ Z} \Longleftarrow  \textbf{X } {\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{G} \textbf{ Y } | \textbf{ Z}$$
G is said to be a **perfect map** of M if it is both a D-map and an I-map, that is

$$\textbf{X } {\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{P} \textbf{ Y } | \textbf{ Z} \Longleftrightarrow  \textbf{X } {\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{G} \textbf{ Y } | \textbf{ Z}$$
and in this case G is said to be **faithful** or **isomorphic** to M.

$\textbf{Definition.}$ A variable V is a **collider** or has a **V structure**, if it has 2 upcoming parents. 

```{r, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="V is a collider", fig.align="center"}
collider_net <- empty.graph(nodes = c("A","B","V"))
arc.set <- matrix(c("A", "V",
                    "B", "V"),
                  byrow = TRUE, ncol = 2,
                  dimnames = list(NULL, c("from", "to")))
arcs(collider_net) <- arc.set
graphviz.plot(collider_net)
```

You can find all the **V structures** of a DAG:

```{r}
vstructs(dag)
```

Note that conditioning on a collider induces dependence
even though the parents aren't directly connected.

> $\textbf{Definition (d-separation)}$ If G is a directed graph in which $\textbf{X}$, $\textbf{Y}$ and $\textbf{Z}$ are disjoint sets of vertices, then $\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ are **d-connected** by $\textbf{Z}$ in G if and only if there exists an undirected path U between some vertex in $\textbf{X}$ and some vertex in $\textbf{Y}$ such that for every collider C on U, either C or a descendent of C is in $\textbf{Z}$, and no non-collider on U is in $\textbf{Z}$. 

Reviewer: Remove d-separation from this part, put it in part described above.

$\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ are **d-separated** by $\textbf{Z}$ in G if and only if they are not d-connected by $\textbf{Z}$ in G. 

We assume that graphical separation (${\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{G}$) implies probabilistic independence (${\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{P}$) in a Bayesian network.

We can investigate whether two nodes in a **bn** object are d-separated using
the **dsep** function. **dsep** takes three arguments, x, y and z, corresponding to
$\textbf{X}$, $\textbf{Y}$ and $\textbf{Z}$; the first two must be the names of two nodes being tested for d-separation, while the latter is an optional d-separating set. So, for example,

```{r}
dsep(dag, x = "S", y = "R")
dsep(dag, x = "O", y = "R")
dsep(dag, x = "S", y = "R", z = "E")
```

> ## Markov Property, Equivalence classes and CPDAGS

Reviewer: Remove this subsection in favor of above changes.

same **equivalence class**.

## Skeleton of a network, CPDAGs and equivalence classes

The skeleton of a network is the network without any direction. Here is the skeleton of the dag for survey dataset.

```{r}
graphviz.plot(skeleton(dag))
```

$\textbf{Theorem. (Equivalence classes)}$ Two DAGs defined over the same set of variables are equivalent and only  they have the same skeleton (i.e., the same underlying undirected graph) and the same v-structures.

```{r}
data(learning.test)
learn.net1 = empty.graph(names(learning.test))
learn.net2 = empty.graph(c("A","B","C","D","E","F"))
modelstring(learn.net1) = "[A][C][F][B|A][D|A:C][E|B:F]"
arc.set2 <- matrix(c("B", "A",
                    "A", "D",
                    "C", "D",
                    "B", "E",
                    "F", "E"),
                  byrow = TRUE, ncol = 2,
                  dimnames = list(NULL, c("from", "to")))
arcs(learn.net2) <- arc.set2
graphviz.compare(learn.net1,learn.net2)
bnlearn::score(learn.net1, learning.test, type = "loglik")
bnlearn::score(learn.net2, learning.test, type = "loglik")
# type == "loglik" means you get the log likelihood of the data given the dag and the MLE of the parameters
```

> In other words, the only arcs whose directions are important are those that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, the only arcs whose directions are important are those that 
are part of one or more v-structures.
```

Let's avoid unnecessary newlines

> are part of one or more v-structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove unnecessary newlines

DAG underlying a BN: the CPDAG of the equivalence class the BN belongs
to. Another graphical representation that can be derived from the DAG is the
**moral graph**.

The moral graph is an undirected graph that is constructed as follows:

1. connecting the non-adjacent nodes in each v-structure with an undirected
arc;

2. ignoring the direction of the other arcs, effectively replacing them
with undirected arcs.

This transformation is called **moralisation** because it "marries" non-adjacent
parents sharing a common child. In the case of our example dag, we can
create the moral graph with the **moral** function as follows:

```{r}
graphviz.plot(moral(dag2))
```

Moralisation has several uses. First, it provides a simple way to transform
a BN into the corresponding Markov network, a graphical model using undirected
graphs instead of DAGs to represent dependencies.

In a Markov network, we say that $\textbf{X} {\!\perp\!\!\!\perp}_{G} \textbf{Y} | \textbf{Z}$ if every path between $\textbf{X}$ and $\textbf{Y}$ contains some node $Z \in \textbf{Z}$.\footnote{https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/~teh/teaching/probmodels/lecture2graphical.pdf}

> ## Reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Some Useful References
```

> Bayesian Networks with examples in R" by Scutari and Denis

Reviewer: Use a proper citation style like MLA
